Learn HTML (modules 12-20) (#9576)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/learn/html/dialog/index.md

authors:
  - estelleweyl
description: 'The <dialog> element is a useful element for representing any kind of dialog in HTML, find out how it works.'
date: 2023-14-02
tags:
  - html
---

A modal dialog is a special type of pop-up box on a web page: a pop-up that interrupts the user to focus on itself. There are
some valid [use cases for popping up a dialog](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/modal-nonmodal-dialog/), but great consideration
should be made before doing so. Modal dialogs force users to focus on specific content, and, temporarily at least, ignore
the rest of the page.

Dialogs can be either modal (only the content in the dialog can be interacted with) or non-modal (it's still possible to interact
with content outside of the dialog). Modal dialogs are displayed on top of the rest of the page content. The rest

> of the page is inert and, by default, obscured by a semi-transparent backdrop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the page is [inert](learn/html/focus/) and, by default, obscured by a semi-transparent backdrop.
```

The semantic HTML [`<dialog>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dialog) element to create a dialog
comes with semantics, keyboard interactions, and all the properties and methods of the [`HTMLDialogElement`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/HTMLDialogElement) interface.

## Modal dialogs

> Here is an example of a modal `<dialog>`. There are three ways to close the dialog: the escape key, submitting a form with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a modal `<dialog>`. Open the dialog with the "Open modal dialog" button. Once opened, there are three ways to close the dialog: the escape key, submitting a form with
```

method, it is a modal dialog. Opening a modal dialog deactivates and obscures everything other than the dialog itself. If you
hover over the UI outside of the dialog, you’ll note all the elements are behaving as if [`pointer-events: none;`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/pointer-events)
was set; even the button that opens the dialog doesn’t react to interactions.

When the dialog is opened, focus moves into the dialog. Focus is set on the first element in the sequential keyboard navigation order within that dialog.
If you hit the `tab` key repeatedly, you’ll note that only the content within the dialog can get focus while the modal dialog is
open. Everything outside of the modal dialog is inert as long as the dialog is open.

When a dialog is closed, modal or not, focus is returned to the element that opened the dialog. If you programmatically
open a dialog not based on user action, reconsider. If you must, ensure that focus is put back where it was prior to the dialog opening,
especially if the user dismisses the dialog without interacting with it.

> There is a global `inert` attribute that can be used to disable an element and all of its descendants, other than any active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a global [`inert`](/learn/html/focus/#the-inert-attribute) attribute that can be used to disable an element and all of its descendants, other than any active
```

dialog. When a modal dialog is opened using `openModal()`, the inertness or deactivation comes for free; the attribute
isn’t explicitly set.

The backdrop that obscures everything other than the dialog can be styled using the [`::backdrop`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/::backdrop)
pseudo-element. The backdrop is only displayed when a `<dialog>` is displayed with the `.showModal()` method. This pseudo-element
matches all the backdrops, including the one displayed when the [FullScreen API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Fullscreen_API) is used,
such as when viewing a video in full-screen mode which doesn’t have the same aspect ratio as the screen or monitor.

## Non-modal dialogs

The `HTMLDialogElement.show()` similarly opens a dialog, but without adding a backdrop or causing anything to become inert.
The escape key does not close non-modal dialogs. Because of this, it is even more important to ensure you include a method
of closing the non-modal dialog. In doing so, if the closer is outside the dialog, realize the focus will go to the element
that opened the dialog, which may not be the best user experience.

{% Codepen {
user: 'web-dot-dev',

> id: 'bGKQvza'

Reviewer: there is a typo in this codepen. "**not** that focus was" should read "**note** that focus was"

When a dialog is opened, the boolean [`open`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTML/Element/dialog#attr-open) attribute
is present, meaning the dialog is active and can be interacted with. When a dialog is opened by adding the `open` attribute rather
than via `.show()` or `.showModal()`, the dialog will be modal-less. The [`HTMLDialogElement.open`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/HTMLDialogElement/open)
property returns `true` or `false`, depending on whether the dialog is available for interaction—not whether it is modal or not.

While JavaScript is the preferred method of opening a dialog, including the `open` attribute on page load, and then removing
it with `.close()`, can help ensure the dialog is available even when JavaScript is not.

## Additional details

### Don't use `tabindex`

The element that is activated to open the dialog and the close button contained in it (and possibly other content) can receive
focus and are interactive. The `<dialog>` element is not interactive and doesn’t receive focus. Do not add the `tabindex` property

> to the dialog itself. Ever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the dialog itself.
```

### ARIA roles

The implicit role is [`dialog`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/dialog_role). If the dialog
is a confirmation window communicating an important message that requires a confirmation or other user response, set [`role="alertdialog"`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/alertdialog_role).
The dialog should also have an accessible name. If visible text can provide for the accessible name, add `aria-labelledby="idOfLabelingText"`.

### CSS defaults

Note that browsers provide default styling for `dialog`. Firefox, Chrome, and Edge set `color: CanvasText;` `background-color: Canvas;`

> and Safari sets `color: black; background-color: white;` in their user-agent stylesheets. Because of this, color is inherited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Safari sets `color: black; background-color: white;` in their user-agent stylesheets. The `color` is inherited
```

from `dialog` and not from `body` or `:root`, which may be unexpected. The `background-color` property is not inherited.

> 
> ## Check your understanding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
